---
title: Google 1 - (Lecture 2)
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-16 09:30:00
layout: category-post
---

## Where We Left off:
- What exactly did you find with how search engines arranged results.
    - Searches are more personalized on Google; if you search "vaccine" 

## The Ranking Algorithm
Obviously, there is quite a bit at play. The big question is in what order do the results of a search engine appear? In particular, what results are going to appear in the first page? If you are moved from the first page to the 5th page, there will be (possibly) millions of dollars at play.

### Relevance
The way the ranking algorithm determines relevance by 
- words in documents
    - Term frequency
    - Inverse Document Frequency
    - The position of words in the document
    - Evidence of highlighted words
- Links, especially the words in the 'anchor text'

#### Example: Review of Cats
- measuring the inverse document frequency
    - amount of term used, document freequency, 4/200 = 0.02
    - the count of total indexed words
##### Analysis of inbound links:
- excerpt from another movie review site
> "I just recently read a really great and scathing [review of the new movie cats]()
- identifies what that result is. 

### Quality
- While it may be weighted by quality of a title, Google invented 

#### PageRankk
- Invented by Sergey Brin and Larry Page in 1998.
- Treats the inbound links to a webpage as a measure of its usefuness or quality.
- Quantity and quality of inbound links.

##### Suppose we go back to our example:
- suppose the two reviews (Guardian + Jezebel), let's say The Guardian has many sources, but links to smaller blogs; now let's look at Jezebel's, where it links to larger news sites (like BuzzFeed, Washington Post, NYT).

## Ranking Algorithm
- Treats links as 'votes' in favour of a particular document;
- Quantifies those as 'votes';
- Ranks documents in order of votes, with the most linked site at the top.

### What's significant about PageRank?
- it gets better, the larger the dataset grows, the broader the dataset reaches.
    - the larger the database, the easier it is to get rid of outliers

#### Implications: 
What is it exactly that Google is looking for in Pagerank? What kind of baises are being enaled by this way of indexing the web? Google attempts to make everything look flawless. 
- Vaidhyanathan: we need to be mindful of some of Google's truth claims
    - "Don't be evil"
    - "to organize the world's information
    - Claims of "objectivity" in results

> "Don't Be Evil"

- Don't shoot the messenger

#### On Google: reading
- Can there be claims of neutrality in search results?
    - what about searchign for god?
- We define relevance in very different way:
    - current vs. historical
        - Do you want to know about god or to become religious or to listen to kanyes album...
    - personal vs informational
        - do we want to know where to go get vaccinations r to know about them or to decide whether to get them.

## Next Week
- What are some implications of PageRank?
- What human values have been deliberately or inadvertently embedded into this search engine?
