---
title: Google 2 - Advertising and Bias (1)
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-21 09:30:00
layout: category-post
---
This week, we will continue our discussion on Google. Over the next couple weeks, we will come back to it over and over again and build on what it is they do. This week, we'll look at how Marketing and Advertising make it into Google, as well as some implications of that. We will also look at how results are gamed.

## Google and Advertising
Last week, we said that Google really ranks this information based on the amount of inbound links. If we had two links, which of the two pages would have more links? It uses this measurement of inbound links to also look at the **quality** of inbound links. The Western Gazette might have a link to a review from The Guardian, whereas a link from the New York Times would have a different pagerank. If you want to know something a little more, mathemetitans have tried to determine the amount of **link juice** or power to that link. If NYT has Link Juice of 1000, and they have 100 links, each gets 10. 

The hard question: if we are searching for something, which one is the best one? It turns this into a ifferent kind of question, where it asks which of these has the highest amount of inbound links. It turns a somewhat subjective question into a numerical question they can answer, but a computer cannot evaluate this overall. They're trying to measure objective questions through mathematical equasions. 

### One of the questions that comes up is how do you make money off of this idea? 
Google had one of the highest ratings out of the search engine, how do they make money and how does that impact search results? One way for us to look at this is how Google had created their buisness plan. Google ran into an issue, where Google's page algorithm was doing too well. The issue quickly became that people weren't spending enough time on the site to make money, as search was so good that they couldn't advertise on their main page. Google quickly started to look at "How Should Advertising Work?"
- Original Google Buisness Plan:
    - licence search technology, allowing for people to search Google from inside other websites;
    - selling hardware: a "Google Quick Search Box"
    - selling advertising

#### How should advertising work?
Google was very against advertising, several papers were written to how search results should not manipulate user intentions. Google thought (when implementing advertising) that ads should enhance the search process, rather than pull people away from it. Google thinks that ads should be relevant, and therefore linked to the keywords. They should maintain a clear line between ads and search results. By searching and buying, it could be similar, but they are not the same.

##### In the Beginning
Orginally Google had "Premium Sponsored Links", Google hired sales staff that approached companies. Companies would agree to place ads against particular keywords; billed according to the amount of clicks the ad got.
Eg. What keywords would you link (cat food)
Premium Sponsored Links would result closely to keywords. Google could be there to have no manipulation. Using traditional banner ads, which are typically reliant on large company. What was neglected? Small buisness. Google realized that there is alot of money to be made around small purchases. You can have two different kinds of products, which sell for $$$, then go to a lower price for the long term.

##### The Alternative: GoTo
GoTo was both a searchengine and a site listing. Companies would pay for rankings. Companies woul ocmpete for places in search results: you paid a premium for a high ranking; companies paid GoTo according to the ClickThrough data.

##### At Google
GoTo's method of selling positions in the search results was considered a breach of ethics. Search results must be organic. The result of the Google ranking algorithm, wil not tamper with the results to make money or to cause offence. The advertising Google does must be seperate from the search results displayed on the right or across the top of the page.

On Google, if you were to search the word "jew", there were antisemetic websites that would come up quickly. Google originally said that no material would be removed, problematic material was remove

In Europe, you are legally obligated to eliminate all hate speech etc.

Google did like the clickthrough idea, where people would click on an ad it would be a connection of search itself. Google liked that you could click on an ad and go straight to a website. Google soon connected this to an auction system, where companies would bid on a keyword. If a user inputs a keyword in a search engine query, the ads are given in descending order of ranking with the highest ranking ad at the premium position. 

The bidding system allows for companies to place a bid on the "cost-per-click": the amount they're willing to pay every time a user clicks through to the company's landing page. The company with the highest bid is charged the price of the second-placed bid. 

Google is not only using bids, but also ad rank.

```
Break
```

### Ad Rank
Quinn asked something like "best catfood" or "cheap cat food" but it's not necessarily that. As aforementioned, Google connects ad rank to the bid. We need to look at how the "Ad Rank" works, which is dependant on a number of things. Your ad will be ranked by the Google Quality Score, which is based on CTR (ClickThrough Rate). They use this on each individual user globaly. Google also defines this through the quality and relevance of the website and advertisement. How much does that ad tap into what is on there. If you have a low CTR, your ad rank may be disqualified.

#### But there are problems
Google appears to allow Racist Ad Targeting like Facebook

Today, we're going to look at what biases might exist in Google Search and Advertising. Some of the ways ads may reinforce stereotypes on potential problems. For example, why did Safiya Noble find seixst pornography at the top of the orgnaic searc hresults when she did Google search on "black girls"?
- Using historic data to push search results (historic biases), what other reasons might appear for why we see sexist racist ads shwoing up in the search results. 

Last week, we defined relevance in very different ways, finding the differences between Google, Yahoo, Bing.
The internet cats to many idffernet intents, including informational and commerical intent: the desire of a user to know something, and the desire and readiness of a user to buy something.

One of the problems with this is that Google has become a principle way that people find out information about material and its biases often shape public perceptions, ie steretypes, racism. Google can shape our image, where seeing things like how things are represented, etc. may alter the ways in which we see things. Google, as well as other platforms will represent things in very stereotypical ways. It has some real problematic aspects. 

One of the things we can get from this is to look at the accuracy: it's measuring the popularity of something. It's not all that different than branding techniques. 