---
title: Models and Algorithms
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-28 09:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-4
    - Lecture
---

Today, we're going to discuss a bit about algorithms nd what exactly they are. We're going to change gears a bit and start looking outside of search engines and more so into big data. In the case of Google, this is how it personalizes our search results. We're going to look at some of the dangers of algorithms and where they go wrong. When we're being targeted, what is being left out? What are the assumptions of algorithms? 

## So Far:
We've been looking at Google, how it ranks things, how it designs search results for us, how it categorizes results, and how it advertises. We often find that there is an illusion of reliability in these results. Is there some kind of implicitly suggested liability into that? 

The reading for the first week by Hathanon often brings up that we trust it because it's almost like it's reading our thoughts. It caters to us based on previous histories. Today it's going to be thinking about algorithms. 

Search bubbles

One of the things we can start to think about in relation to this week's readings, is that we live in this world of algorithms. This term from computer science has moved itself into our every-day experiences. More and more of our everyday life is being mediated by these algorithms (ie, job candidacy, etc.).

We are often exposed to these algorithms without us knowing, for example the idea of killer robots, etc. How they lead to tensions and conflicts within society. ruining elections, digital extremism, etc. One of the things Kathy O'Neil mentions is that we are often warned about algorithms

### The fear of algorithms
Feedback loops, having to search to explore things outside of your 'content bubble'. One of the ironic things is that when we are using algorithms, we are making a decision to use an internal model for how to think about what she's going to make. Human model is prone to errors. Lets start out with the idea of a model.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/cDA3_5982h8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

One way she defines them is a series of concrete steps an example she uses is make an internal model. In terms of big data, an algorithm slightly changes, but the idea is still the same. We're talking about a large set of information. We're using this to model some kind of large data.

### Moneyball 
We're modelling a certain outcome, then trying to bring together some kind of desired result. The idea of big data is the large scale data set. For example, if I were to shop for myself, I can't give you my list and have you get the same thing as I would. If everyone likes a particular thing, maybe there's something about those type of people that will like that thing. Example: Moneyball - sports analytics. Uses big data to understand baseball. It gives a good model as to how Big Data can work. Batting avg. A good player would get ~.3 batting avg. What moneyball tried to do was measure players not only by their batting avg, but also by amount of times on base. 

They relied on these huge sets of data, and understand that person's personal value. This really represents a successful and safe use of algorithms. This is all public data. We could go find the same information, conduct the same research, and it's also statistically rigorous. We can see large scale evidence of everything.

# 4 Main Categories of Algorithms

## The Categories: 
### 1. Prioritization
This is referring to using an algorithm to make an ordered list. This is information that attempts to judge content, then present it to us in an order geared towards us. It creates a certain priority around those results. The one that is most relevant to us is placed at the top. We can also find things like this in Netflix recommendations, etc. They'll often follow this left to right order, based on the different genres. 

### 2. Classification
We can also see the common list of classification. The ways we are classified by different media categories. Doing things such as placing us in specific categories, placing ads, etc. How google has attempted to categorize me for

### 3. Association: Finding links and looking for connections
Looking for associations between things and linking it. 

### 4. Filtering
Moving things based on ratings, sorting algos, etc.


## Case Study
### Facebook
Prioritization: ordered list of new feeds
Classification: Classify you based on "likes" for ads to show
Association: makes connections with friends to recommend new friends
Filtering: News Feeds filter content in order for user.

O'Neil realizes that while algorithms are not always as presented as fair and neutral, instead being based on our biases and preferences. Another way of putting this is that
> Algorithms mediate our experience of the world

They affect how we interact: social systems, communities, etc. They change the ways we make decisions. They are not necessarily ground breaking changes, but instead tries to introduce change in society. They all introduce something. They aren't entirely new in the way that they interact with society.

# Filter Bubbles
[]()

## What is a filter bubble?
Uses clicks to flood with information of one kind. 

## Ramifications / impact:
Doesn't show us anything to challenge ideas

Next Week: How recommendation systems use filter bubbles to aggregate data and present likely candidates.

Filter bubbles create a unique universe of information for each of us, which fundamentally alters the way we encounter ideas and information. Algorithms on Facebook and Google filter content towards your own personal information. 

## How is a Filter Bubble Created?
Algorithmic filters are designed to target content to you, using algorithms to aggregate data on you, targeting based on the data. We often lose out on some notions of our aspirational self, which is information outside of knowledge. Algorithms act as a gatekeeper to curate the world based on user profiles, yet we lack the ability to choose the content we want to see.

## In relation to Google
What role do algorithms play in search? Are their results biased?
- search algorithms determine what to sere up based on input from the user.
- in order to anticipate user desires
- builds a secondary index of the user.

## Facebook
The talk on Filter Bubbles is pointing to something, but it might be a bit beyond that. Facebook also says about themselves, based on the user profile. 
> Posts in News Feed are meant to keep you connected to the people, places and things that you cre about, starting with your friends and family. 

One of the things we can say is that Facebook News Feeds creates filter bubbles that marginalizes content outside our select group. They are blending personal information with trending topics and news topics. This kind of thing, such as something current (Kobe Bryant's Death) what is the reason they are doing this? It often brings forth the notion that alternate perspectives are aggregated out of our newsfeeds. Why is this information in there? The idea is for users to take action or become participatory individuals. Moreover, Facebook's algorithms is designed to maximize content with a high "emotional" response. These ideas have resulted in "extreme" content rising ot the top, ie messages of extreme anger or excitement. 