---
title: Big Data & You (2)
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-02-27 09:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-8
    - Lecture
---

## Final Assignment 
Let's get setup for this project. You are going to write a brief reflection paper, it can be personal. There are two topics, you will have 2 topics to pick from: find you data trail online, or writing (about) one particular issue. 

1. Data Profile through three different sources: data, how you've been profiled through these sites. Google Ads settings; how catagorized, reasons, implications as to how / why categorized that way. Another is to [download facebook data](https://www.wired.com/story/download-facebook-data-how-to-read/), [Apply Magic Sauce](https://applymagicsauce.com/).

So far, the ways that we are analysed and tracked online and categorized into "algorithmic identities". Thinking in terms of the Kathy O'Neil reading. Datasources, cookies, etc. always tracking us. Putting us in mathematical models based on behaviours, tastes, etc. One of the things that Lippold is pointing towards is that our identity is being defined and limited in very specific categories in thinking about who we are. Around how they are placing us in this data. Conservative, liberal, etc. Really defining for us on the very levels of the code, even if we disagree, don't accept ideas, etc. Sets limits on what we can do / can't do. Really a way of defining us online. When the internet started, there was an idea that we're anonymous online. Being able to go online and modify identity / play with different identity categories. Live out diverse categories of who you are / were. We are being defined, personal info is placing limits around person.

Defining masculine or feminine based on categories on our data. 

## Targeted advertisements
Idea of implied categories that give us ads that we want to see, ads work as implied social categories that organize us into specific identity categories. You believe in masculine / feminine

### Microtargeting or predatory ads
Before big data, you created content for a mass audience, individuals identified by demographic.

After big data, you identify indivudials by their specific identites. Collect data on specific subgroups from other data sources and analyze data to figure out which type is most likely to purchase product. If you run into microtargeting work, you need lots of data, more than mass media messages, id of individuals characteristics (age, gender, likes, dislikes, personal desires, lifestyle) and hwo are the people who will be swung by which messages?

For profit personality types, test various ad campaigns to see which solicit response, target vulnerable audiences, who are the types of people that would most likely be persuaded by an ad to go to an online university? What are some ways they targeted vulnerable audiences?

