---
title: Google 2 - Advertising and Bias (2)
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-23 09:30:00
layout: category-post
---

#### Day 2

Last day, we talked about the different measurement methods Google uses to rank pages. We also talked about how ads quality is determined. Today, we are looking at the consumeristic tendancies that emerge from Search Engine. Representation online has often been conflicted with stereotypical ads, such as Safiya Noble found when she searched "black girls" on Google. What it's doing is finding the most common representations and popular representations. Reliability of search is based in overall popularity. Google has continually said that they do not use human curation to manipulate search results. Google, however does push away from "gaming the system". Today, I'd like to talk about 

## Techno-fundamentalism
A blind faith in tech to resolve social issues. When they do encounter problems of antisemetic textss higher in search results, they think they can resolve these issues through something like technology. Googles engineeers are admins and engineers that address problems through technological tools. Vaidhyanathan says that the new "inventions" can be the best of all methods to approach a problem. One of the things he's critiquing is that Google is thinking truth and reliability rather than human deliberation. They are not "Technologically Curable".  For example, if we look at "Professor", Google returns old white men. For example: cn something such as stereotypical representations be determined by "tools"? For Google, who hasn't tried to fix this one, they look backwards and try to find how they can make the search results resolvable. It does rely on certain technological ideas. Therfore, one of the things he's criticizing about Google is that they are not intervening. Google has been lotted by the Civil Rights Organization despite being a neutral technology that simply measures (large) numbers.

He argues that search engines are NOT Neutral becasue they rely on humans to shape the end result. Despite google's claims, Google plays as a gatekeeper who controls and determines the ways individuals. 

## Is Google a Gatekeeper?
How much influence do you think Google has on shaping the way we see the world? Such as in the news, the media, advertising, or mediated representations? Likewise, are other platforms such as Facebook and Twitter gatekeepers? How much do they shape or influnece the way that you access news, information, ideas?

## Information vs. Commerce
There is a tension between Infomration and commerce aspects. When we are thinking about buying, we search. SEO has two different ways, paying Google or Blackhat. One of them actually says something like "how to get to the top of buisness even if you are a nobody". 

## Search Engine Optimization
The act of designing and revising a web-based resource for the purposes of maximising the chances of the site appearing on the first page of a search engine's organic search results when relevant keywords are entered by a user. They're trying to find ways to reorganize websites and appear higher in search results. SEO is not the same as paid advertising. There are two kinds of SEO: White hat and Black Hat.

### White Hat SEO
Techniques a company enhances quality using intrinsic merit, rather than frodulent attempts to raise the ranking. Keyword placement, keyword density. They also use links toe ensure others are able to find it. They often try to create linkable objects, informative "anchor texts" and engage in link building with other sites.

### Black Hat SEO
How are websites attempting to gain Google Search results? How are they attempting to appear higher? Black Hat SEO uses practices that violate a search engine's guidelines in an effort to rais e the ranking of a website in the organic search results. The techniques are most commonly used to gain attraction, often by shady businesses, pornography, casino, illegal content (medications and copyrighted material). Reirects, listing key words at the bottom of the page. Often pages will link to another to increase inbound links (Link Farming). Also, descriptive aanchor texts (that is inaccurate).

#### Google bombing
The practice of causing a website ot rank highly in web search engine results for irrelevant, unrelated or off-topic search terms by linking heavily. This is often done for business, political, or comedic purposes. When a crawler scans the text, it will link the content to a key term. RECENTLY: using term "idiot" to show Trump. 
 
## Why is all of this significant?
Websites are trying to attract our attention. Much of the content we se online are tied to websites that attempt to link thier content to searchable information. We need to think critically. What if the tools Gogole uses to meaure results arebeing "gamed" by companies attempting to appear higher in the list? 
- eg. Porn sites use key terms that link "Black Girls" to sexualized content that appeal to investors
- Other websites attempt to appeal to specifically searchable terms. 

Despite Google's claims of non-iinterference, there are "humans in the machine" that are continually fixing the algorigthm in an attempt ot change results. These issues, however, require more oversight and critical analysis than computer algorithms.