---
title: Social Credit System
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-03-12 09:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-10
    - Lecture
---

I've invited Dominique Kelly here today because I think that there are some interesting crossovers between what we've learned in the course so far.

##### Guest Lecturer: Dominique Kelly

Today, we'll be drawing some 

## Social Credit System
Assesses a human's trustworthiness; determines if people are trustworthy and built scores. 

### Objectives
It's to ensure that the system allows the trustworthy to roam everywhere under heaven while making it hard for the discredited to take a single step. It will contrast the difference between a high score and a low score. 

In this illustration, top is "I can go anywhere", other person has a lose trust and says "I'm blocked everywhere". On the Social Credit website, "I can't move a single step". Allows for people with good score to do whatever, whereas low scores cannot. 

Now that we've identified the aims of the system, now we can look at it in how the system works. Quite a few beta projects have been started (run by provincial / city). 350-950, 1000 var / 5 datasets. This illustration shows the 5 categories: identity char, fulfillment cap, credit history, social rel... 

## Sesame Credit
Disclosures from the:

Gain points: Donting to charity
Buying items that suggest trustworthiness

If address changes often, your score can drop, browsing late at night, spending time playing video games, and being friends with lower-scores. People are openly allowed to share their scores, mobile phone game: guess if higher or lower than friends...

## Rongcheng:

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/Dkw15LkZ_Kw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

so, as that video shows, the system in that city is more important than that of Sesame Credit; 

Gain points: 
Giving blood, return lost money, volunteering
Lose points:
organing disruptive events, j-walking, etc.

Grades: AAA - D; if you have a grade of A+ or higher, you can get social assistance, subsidies, etc. If you're 999 - 600, you can be banned from getting your children into schools.

If you've been blacklisted, you can end up in advertisements. The method in Rongcheng, the information collectors manually record deeds, whereas Seseme Credit, ... Additionally, the citizens have a book listing all of the additions and deductions to their score.

We can find several key themes in how the system has been represented in Western media. 'Nosedive', everyone. Additionally, the panopticon model involves the idea of a supervisor, resulting in changed behaviour. 

Gamification: use of game mechanics to simulate behaviour change. As you complete tasks, gives reward. In the case of chinese government...

I haven't seen all that much in relation to *The Circle*, which wants to create a world of social responsibility, you could draw similarities between the movie, etc. High level of transparency can make us better people, etc.

With all of that being said, in western countries, we are closer to the system than we think. For instance, scoring systems are common in AirBNB and Uber, where the driver / passenger rate eachother. Additionally, Uber can ban passengers based on the area that you're in. 

A few years ago, there was an app released called *peeple*, the app did launch, but was never successful, nor popular. In the end, you could respond with positive, neutral or negative, in personal, professional, dating. You'd have to..

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/uhnUzqLfykI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Ironically, that video disabled comments and likes / dislikes. For the curious, if you go to the website of peeple, it says coming soon, but also has a sign up. 'launched globally in 2020', but in bringing up this app, the ability to get extremely personal information.

