---
title: Predictive Analytics
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-03-03 09:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-9
    - Lecture
---

Today we will be talking about predictive analytics, particularly what is it, how does it work and how is it being implemented in things such as crime prediciton. Last week, you'll remember we were talking about personal data and privacy issues started to emerge. Who are these people, what do they want? Data brokers, advertisers, marketers are trying to link this data to who you are and create categories. This is the idea of creating subsets of the population. We talked in the video about advertisers trying to attract people with a lower education desiring higher, or appealing to low-income people in different ways. Idea is that they can sell a list of people that are [Bipolar, LGBTQ2+ groups] and other markets of people. When collecting data, they're trying to collect data to find patterns. How do people act, react. If we look at a specific audience, how do they react to different advertisements. They're also trying to influence future events based on what you might do in the future. This is something that a loyalty card. Eg: PC Optimum, points being used. They are trying to market things to individuals. They're trying to think what are the different things that happen? Determine how much to expect working on each day. At Home Depot, they had a projection of how many people were going to come in. If you don't match those targets, they can change how many employees. 

One of the ways they're trying to do this is collect data on how people behave in the past to predict future. If we measure things that happened, we can make predctions of what is going to happen in the future. They're really trying to measure probability. If every tuesday they sell a certain number of bananas, they might have a good idea of how much they will sell that week. How does this relate to a certain aggregate of people. How can we figure out a trend of users? If they can look at you and see that you're likely to buy during that week, then they can use what they are calling Predictive Analytics.

## Predicitve Analytics
Prediction based on machine learning: 
> "Computers automatically developing new knowledge and capabilities by furiously feeding on modern society's greatest and most potent unnatural resource: data.
- Eric Siegel, Predictive Analytics: *The Power to Predict Who Will Clock, Buy, Lie, or Die*. p.3

Predictive analytics is the practice of collecting all of this data, then finding connections between points.

### Machine Learning
A computer algorithm that works on a massive amount of data that seems to have no [clear] pattern. It's looking through clusters of data to find commonalities in all of this data. We can think of this in some things, such as Google Autocomplete. Trying to figure out what you are going to type into the search bar: RankBrain, machine learning program that makes predictions based on broader popularity and individualization (personal data). They're trying to cater to the wider public.

#### HP's Flight Risk Model:
Which employees are likely to quit (based on data) how can they be retained? They analyzed 330,000 employees and measured their "flight risk". Looked at salaries, raises, job, ratings, promotions and looked at current employees versus those that left. 

#### The Google Flu
Can google predict flu epidemics using prediction? They thought they had a big data hubris, where looking around big data, the data can only tell us so much. It has to be accurate. It can only be as accurate as the proxies we use to measure it. Are the people searching for this likely to have the flu? 

#### Predictive Policing
Looks at historical data, trends, etc. tries to understand what is most likely to happen: who is most likely to commit crimes, where are they most likely to happen? I have read articles where in London, ON is being used. They were implementing and in testing phases. It's used in big cities in Canada, and even more in the US. It's lead to some problems and questions. 

#### Probability and Punishment
They're trying to use a sort of pre-emptive reports (minority report) sources of data: Data brokers, social media, crime data, profiling, hotspots, location.

context: waves of much-public protests over police killings of anarmed people of colour: Black Lives Matter, protests. Coupled with decreasing police budgets, big data promises more 'objective' and 'accurate' results. The kind of erasure of state funding to policing. They're trying to find quicker ways of measuring data. 

#### The Small Social Networks at the Heart of Chicago Violence
Andrew Papachristos, a sociologist focused on how violence spreads like a virus through lines of contact, based on social networks, family, friends, location, etc. Just like a social network online. All residents have a certain risk factor. People who get involved in crime are much more likely to if your family members or neighbours are in crime, they try to follow the lines of transmission. Networks of violence: What are factors that unite individuals involved in crime? people, poverty rates, etc. 

## Two Main Approaches:
1. Individual - Trying to target particular individuals
2. Spacial - looking at places

### Individual Approach
If we think of crime as a network that this sociologist talks about, we're looking at who is likely to be party to crime, and those that are likely to be victims of crime. Prevent approach: who are the people likely to fall into crime. Try to warn those who are likely to come into crime. Who are they close to, who are they likey to come out with... Prevent from becoming victims. If we think of it as "Focused Deterrence", we can look at crime and somewhere along the chain stop it from spreading further. They're going to target those who are most likely to come into crime. Often considered to be profiling, looking at specific people and targeting them based on data. Is there anything that points to this still being 'innocent until proven guilty?'

#### Chicago "Heat List"
An algorithm used to determine those likey to be involved in crime and gun violence. Priority targets of individuals most likely to commit crimes. Based on: criminal history, arrests, parole status, connection to gangs. This will connect them with different social services, etc.  in 2016, identified 70% of people shot and 80% of criminals. 

1. Individual 
There are alot of ethical questions that emerge from this: 
- Should a person be treated differently simply because they share attributes with others who have higher risks of crime?

- Should police use personal information to make assumptions and judgements on individuals? 

2. Spacial
- Police use data mining of past crimes to forecast areas of risk to create a probability assessment in relation to other areas around
one of the goals of this are to ensure police are appropriate in numbers at the right time.
- Goal: to be able to place right number of police in appropriate areas at right times.

#### Terrain modeling
Examining the environments where crime is most likely to happen: identify hotspots
- multifamily housing units, parks, low-income housing, bars/resteraunts.

Crime typically happens where police are. One of these articles is called 'PredPol', an algorithm used by police to measure locations of crime, similar to compstat discussed in reply all. Predpol predicted 50% of gun homicides.

### Some of the benefits:
Save money, help understand factors triggering or facilitating crime, aiding in tactical and strategic police activities. When we look at something like this, can we find the triggering factors, can we use it in different ways, whether it be figuring out what kind of people are likely to become involved. Why do crimes happen in a particular area. Define similarities and similarities in what causes this data? How do we understand data as an assemblage of interconnected material?

### Pitfalls: 
If we have collected all of this data that represents one kind of group, once mapped out it will look only for that; he calls alot of black data (as in opaque, racially coded, distorting of legal regulations, as in the next big thing.) It also creates feedback loops, and biased algorithms. 

Can we presume someone is innocent because the data says otherwise? Big data as the next big thing? 

### Innocence? 
What about the presumption of innocence? Can individuals still be presumed to be innocent when data labels them as high risk? 

### Does data influence Police Behaviour?
What happens to police behaviour when they anticipate that crimes are being commited, or that a select individual is likely to commit a crime? How does that change they police or target individuals?

