---
title: Recommendation Systems (2)
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-02-06 09:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-5
    - Lecture
---

Access and Reccomendation

Last Class, we talked about rhetoric of personalization. There is this promise and hype that they're personalized and are doing so many things to show us what we want. Last day when we talked about Netflix, we don't want to know why they're providing that content. There's this promise that they are tailored to us.

> "There are 33 million different versions of Netflix"
- Joris Evers, Director of Global Communications

We're going to look at this, and Bandersnatch is the idea that we don't always get what we want. Big data systems don't always deliver.

This personalization enables Netflix's analysis of vast quantities of customer data, generated by monitoring user's responses. The data collected includes: Starting and pausing films, rewinding, selections. They'll also look at how we select, what we add to our wish lists. They're never really providing it in the way that we want. Netflix emphasises this personalization. 

What Netflix is really trying to do is model behaviour through data. This makes it possible to measure future preferences, attitudes and behaviours without motivations, speeches, or interests, but on data. What Netflix is trying to do is: How do we determine what people like? One of the interesting things that Netflix CEO has said is "if you watch the Goop Lab 10 times a year, it's more in your interest". We can uncover this truth through data reference. 

In House of Cards, they claimed they had data on what people wanted. They choose this as their first landmark Television show. Spent $100 million to produce 2 seasons. Based on user data. They immediately jumped on this, attached themselves to this. Critics then realized that Netflix would be able to craft techniques to push us to where they want us to go. Because they have all of this user data, etc. It's not based on what our preferences are, but rather because they're trying to manipulate our data.

They're trying to understand user data, find out what we want. This behaviour data is used to keep audiences watching. What keeps people coming back to Netflix? Now, a video on Netflix Reccomendation and the porn industry. [How streaming sites like Netflix are taking design cues from the porn industry to keep people watching CBC (play from 2:02)](https://www.cbc.ca/radio/spark/suggestions-subscriptions-and-no-sense-of-community-streaming-is-changing-the-way-we-watch-tv-1.5445781). 

The design of Netflix is fully immersing, it's designed for you to find something, not exactly what you want. Netflix's browsing design makes it so you get a little bit of what you want. Satisfaction through abundance, but never fully satisfies. It's satisfaction through the vast amount of information available. We may be searching for a very particular thing, but we're never really satisfied with it. It also has an overflow of content. It's an organized chaos of sorts, meant to distract us, pull us away from main interest or target. When Netflix originally launched, people wanted Netflix to show EVERY MOVIE YOU HAD. People would look through, not find what they wanted, then cancel their subscription. Now, you use a browsing model. Inclusion and occlusion. If you're wanting to look for a specific thing, they want to know when you'll give up. They want you to come back.

Binge watching
What is is about the design that makes you want to binge it? 

The idea of addiction by design: stopping queues. The idea is that there are stopping periods -- eat dinner, clean up. This is a signal to our brains that we're still there. Technology doesn't have a stopping queue. Instead, it's closer to "this is what I want", we never have this stopping queue. It's embedded in the design of the technology. To summarize that idea of personalization, it's about subtly suggesting that we should keep watching, keep searching for the perfect film and engage in continuous browsing.

One of the things you want to know is significant is this process of personalization

## Corrupt Personalization
The idea is that your attention is drawn to interests that are not your own. Things such as Google, Facebook trying to draw attention away from what you are looking for: draw you towards something else like advertisements. Blending together organic and targeted content, distracting from genuine interests. Netflix and Google are a bit different, it is going to show us mixed filtering. We know that ads are up there, search results are here. While trying to remain with a difference: Is this content really personalized?

Often, content is not really tailored to us, but instead they draw from people who are established. They're not tailoring it to individuals, but instead the masses. They use established stars, directors, etc. The user model of measuring past behaviour. If we think of this in terms of Netflix, we see this corrupt personalization, which we are interested in as well as mixing in of natural information. One example is a Netflix Original: the idea of personalization promise and the content that they're trying to target toward you. 

## Access
This kind of personalization excludes access to other possibilities, limits the range of our possibilities at the level of code. We are limited by what is given to us. This brings us to the idea of satisfaction through abundance. We are constantly looking for what exactly is matching our mood. How we access huge amounts of data and how we live in a world with massive amounts of data that we cannot understand. 

I'd like to think a bit about Bandersnatch in terms of the idea of corrupt personalization. The idea that they're going to create something in the personalization of our own interests. I was watching an interview with Charlie Brooker, you are in charge of this information. We can think of this movie as a CORRUPT PERSONALIZATION. Isn't this a commentary on the individual living in the era of big data. I think one of the key themes of the movie sis the illusion of personalization. The idea that it's not *that* interactive. The stories are pretty set out, and the movie directs you in the same way. 

It's the illusion of personalization that you experience. It really tries to frustrate the idea of personalization. You're left with these problematic or different choices from what we want. We have to choose what cereal or what music. There are slight differences of music or what you're eating. Do you know who you're choosing what your listening to? Do you know on a record is? Does anyone know what choices we are going to make? It's always frustrating our attempts to make a choice. It's about not really wanting to make one of these choices. Who is going to jump, etc.

Also, the whole movie in itself is a commentary on the lack of free will. Expressing the idea of not having a freedom of choice. Our choices always being determined based on our user profile. We are using all of this to understand him. He's critiquing the idea of userdata.

## What about the O'Neil Reading?
In terms of what of she was talking about, what are the problems with the college rankings happen in this math destruction. Students having to pay more, etc. How did they measure what the best colleges were: test scores, acceptance rates, how many people were rejected in application process. Student experience, sports teams, etc. were foucsed on, building the reputation of the school. If we were going to determine of Western was a good school, what would we look at? 
- quality of schooling
- grades of students
- Services
- Funding opportunities
- Infrastructure
- Quality of Education
- Employment Rates

